PART ONE

Australia and its people
At the citizenship ceremony, you pledge your loyalty to Australia and its people. It is therefore important for you to
have an understanding of Australia’s community and population, including our Indigenous heritage. It is also
important for you to understand Australia’s history and how we have developed into a stable and successful
multicultural nation.
In this section, you will read about some of the events that have contributed to our story. There is information about
our states and territories, and the traditions and symbols that we proudly identify as being distinctly Australian.

Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples
Australia’s first inhabitants are the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, who have the oldest continuous
cultures and traditions in the world.
Historically, Aboriginal people are from mainland Australia and Tasmania. The archaeological record indicates
that Aboriginal peoples arrived in Australia between 65,000 and 40,000 years ago; however, the Aboriginal
peoples believe they are central to the creation stories of this land, and their creation stories commence with the
beginning of time. Torres Strait Islander people are from islands between the northern tip of Queensland and
Papua New Guinea.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples have age-old beliefs and traditions that still guide them today.
They have a deep connection with the land, which is expressed in their stories, art and dance. Indigenous cultures
are diverse and an important part of Australia’s national identity.

Early days of European settlement
European settlement started when the first 11 convict ships, which became known as the ‘First Fleet’, arrived from
Great Britain on 26 January 1788.
At this time British laws were harsh and the jails could not hold the large number of people imprisoned for their
crimes. To manage this problem, the British Government decided to transport convicts to the other side of the
world: to the new colony of New South Wales.
The first Governor of the colony of New South Wales was Captain Arthur Phillip. The colony survived, and as more
convicts and free settlers arrived, it grew and developed. More colonies were established in other parts of Australia.
Early free settlers came from Great Britain and Ireland. This British and Irish heritage has had a major influence on
Australia’s recent history, culture and politics.
In 1851, a ‘gold rush’ began when gold was discovered in the colonies of New South Wales and Victoria.
People from all around the world came to these colonies to try to make their fortunes. Chinese people arriving
at this time were the first large group of migrants not from Europe. In 10 years, Australia’s population more
than doubled.

The nation of Australia
In 1901, the separate colonies were united into a
federation of states called the Commonwealth of
Australia. It was at this time that our national
democratic institutions, including our national
parliament, government and the High Court were
established under the new Australian Constitution.
In 1901, Australia’s population was about four million.
This number did not include Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander peoples, as it was not until after a
Referendum in 1967 that they were included in
official estimates of the Australian population.
Throughout the first half of the 20th century,
migration levels rose and fell. There were programs
to actively encourage British migrants to settle here,
and many did.

The diversity of Australia’s population has
increased over the last two centuries. This diverse
and prosperous society enhances Australia’s
connection to the world. While we celebrate the
diversity of Australia’s people, we also aim to build a
cohesive and unified nation.
Australia’s national language is English. It is part of
our national identity. In keeping with Australian
values, migrants should learn and use English to
help them participate in Australian society.
Communicating in English is important for making
the most of living and working in Australia.
Other languages are also valued, including
more than 100 distinct Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander languages.

A wave of non-British migration came after
World War II, when millions of people in Europe
had to leave their homelands. Large numbers of
Europeans came to Australia to build a new life.
In recent years, our migration and refugee programs
have brought people to Australia from all over the
world. People have come here to join family, to make
a new life, or to escape poverty, war or persecution.

Australia’s states and territories
The Commonwealth of Australia is a federation of states and territories. There are six states and two mainland
territories. Canberra is Australia’s capital city, and each state and mainland territory has its own capital.

State

Capital city

New South Wales (NSW)

Sydney

Victoria (Vic.)

Melbourne

Queensland (Qld)

Brisbane

Western Australia (WA)

Perth

South Australia (SA)

Adelaide

Tasmania (Tas.)

Hobart

Territory

Capital city

Australian Capital Territory (ACT)

Canberra

Northern Territory (NT)

Darwin

The states
New South Wales was the first colony established by the British. Sydney is the capital
city of New South Wales and is the nation’s largest city. The Sydney Harbour Bridge
and Opera House are national icons.

Victoria is the smallest of the mainland states. Victoria’s capital city is Melbourne.
Many fine buildings in Victoria were built from the wealth created by the gold rush of
the 1850s. Victoria’s icons include the Melbourne Cricket Ground, the 12 Apostles,
and the Royal Exhibition Building.
Queensland is the second largest state. Queensland’s capital city is Brisbane.
The Torres Strait Islands lie to the north of the state and the world-famous Great Barrier
Reef runs along its eastern coast. Queensland has tropical rainforests, temperate coastal
areas and an often dry inland.
Western Australia is the largest state. Perth is the capital city of Western Australia.
The east of the state is mostly desert, while the south-west is a rich agricultural and
wine-growing area. The state is home to many large mining projects. Western Australia’s
icons include the Ningaloo Coast, Margaret River, and the Kimberley region.

South Australia has a rugged coastline and many famous wine regions. Adelaide,
the capital city, has many examples of fine colonial architecture. South Australia’s icons
include the Barossa Valley and the Flinders Ranges.

Tasmania is the smallest state, separated from the mainland by the Bass Strait.
Tasmania’s capital city is Hobart. Much of the island has unspoilt wilderness landscapes.
Tasmanian icons include Cradle Mountain, Port Arthur, and the Bay of Fires.

The territories
The Australian Capital Territory is located between Sydney and Melbourne.
It is home to the nation’s capital city, Canberra. Several national institutions are
located in Canberra, including Parliament House and the High Court of Australia.

The Northern Territory has a tropical environment in the north of the state and
dry red desert in the south. Darwin is the capital city. Northern Territory icons include
Uluru, Kata Tjuta and Kings Canyon.

Traditions
Welcome to Country and
Acknowledgement of
Country protocols
A Welcome to Country is a cultural practice performed
by an Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander custodian of
the local region, welcoming visitors to their traditional
land. This was traditionally performed to ensure
visitors had a safe and protected journey during their
time on that land.
A Welcome to Country can take place through many
forms, including songs, dances, smoking ceremonies
or speeches in traditional language or English.
A Welcome to Country is usually the first item of
proceedings to open an event.

An Acknowledgement of Country is an opportunity
to recognise that the gathering is on Aboriginal or
Torres Strait Islander land; pay respect to Traditional
Custodians, particularly Elders past and present;
and pay respect to Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander peoples in attendance.
An Acknowledgement of Country is usually delivered
as part of the Welcome and Housekeeping at
meetings and events. Anyone can deliver an
Acknowledgement of Country. At meetings/events,
this would generally be done by the Chair or Master of
Ceremonies.
These practices are performed to show respect for
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.

Important days for Australians
Australia Day

Anzac Day

On 26 January each year, we celebrate Australia Day.
Australia Day is a public holiday in every state and
territory in Australia. It is the anniversary of the arrival of
the First Fleet from Great Britain in 1788.

Anzac Day is commemorated on 25 April each year.
Anzac Day is named after the Australian and
New Zealand Army Corps, which landed at Gallipoli
in Türkiye during World War I on 25 April 1915.

On Australia Day, communities across Australia reflect
on our history, and the people who have contributed to
our shared achievements. It is the biggest annual public
holiday in Australia.

Anzac Day is a solemn day when we remember the
sacrifice of all Australians who served and died in
wars, conflicts and peacekeeping operations.
We also honour the courage and commitment of all
servicemen and women and reflect on the many
different meanings of war.

Australia Day is about acknowledging and celebrating
the contribution that every Australian makes to our
contemporary and dynamic nation: from our Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander peoples—who have been
here for approximately 65,000 years—to those who
have lived here for generations, and those who have
come from all corners of the globe to call our country
home. Australia Day is marked by events across
Australia, including special citizenship ceremonies.
During Australia Day celebrations, the Prime Minister
announces the Australian of the Year Awards
in Canberra.

Australia’s flags
The Australian National Flag is the official flag of our nation. Other flags that are officially recognised and may be
flown in the community include the Australian Aboriginal Flag and the Torres Strait Islander Flag.
Each state and territory also has its own flag, which can be viewed on page 11.

The Australian National Flag
The Australian National Flag is blue, white and red.
• The ‘Union Jack’, which is the flag of the United
Kingdom is in the top left corner. It represents our
history of British settlement and the laws and
institutions we inherited as a result.
• The Commonwealth Star is under the Union Jack.
This star has seven points, each point representing
one of the six states and one point for the territories.
• The Southern Cross, on the right, is a group of stars
that can be seen in the southern sky.

The Australian Aboriginal Flag

The Australian Aboriginal Flag is black, red and yellow.
• The top half is black and represents the Aboriginal
peoples of Australia.
• The bottom half is red and represents the earth,
which has ceremonial significance.
• The yellow circle represents the sun.

The Torres Strait Islander Flag
The Torres Strait Islander Flag is green, blue,
black and white.
• The green stripes represent the land.
• The blue panel in the centre represents the sea.
• The black lines represent the Torres Strait
Islander people.
• The white dancer’s headdress in the centre is a
symbol for all Torres Strait Islanders.
• The points of the white star represent the island
groups in the Torres Strait, and the colour white
symbolises peace.

Australia’s symbols
Commonwealth Coat of Arms
The Commonwealth Coat of Arms is the official symbol
of the Commonwealth of Australia. It represents our
national unity. It identifies the authority and property of
the Commonwealth of Australia.
• The shield in the centre represents the six states
and federation.
• A kangaroo and an emu support the shield on each
side. Both are native Australian animals.
• A gold Commonwealth Star sits above the shield.
• The background is the golden wattle, Australia’s
national flower.

Australia’s national flower

Australia’s national flower is the golden wattle. This
small tree grows mainly in south-eastern Australia. It
has bright green leaves and many golden yellow
flowers in spring. Each of the states and territories of
Australia also has its own floral emblem.

Australia’s national colours
Australia’s national colours are green and gold—the
colours of the golden wattle. The uniforms of our
national sports teams are usually green and gold.

Australia’s national gemstone

The opal is Australia’s national gemstone. According to
Aboriginal legend, a rainbow touched the earth and
created the colours of the opal.

Australia’s national anthem
‘Advance Australia Fair’ is Australia’s national anthem. It is sung on occasions of national
importance, including at Australian citizenship ceremonies and major sporting events.

Advance Australia Fair
Australians all let us rejoice,
For we are one and free;
We’ve golden soil and wealth for toil;
Our home is girt by sea;
Our land abounds in nature’s gifts
Of beauty rich and rare;
In history’s page, let every stage
Advance Australia Fair.
In joyful strains then let us sing,
Advance Australia Fair.
Beneath our radiant Southern Cross
We’ll toil with hearts and hands;
To make this Commonwealth of ours
Renowned of all the lands;
For those who’ve come across the seas
We’ve boundless plains to share;
With courage let us all combine
To Advance Australia Fair.
In joyful strains then let us sing,
Advance Australia Fair.

PART TWO
Australia’s democratic beliefs, rights and liberties
At the citizenship ceremony, you pledge that you will share Australia’s democratic beliefs and respect its rights and
liberties. It is very important that you understand Australia’s democratic beliefs, and the rights and liberties shared
by Australians.
This part of the booklet lists these beliefs, rights and liberties. For more information see Part 4, Australian values.

Our democratic beliefs
Parliamentary democracy
Australia’s system of government is a parliamentary democracy. As part of this system, the power of the government
comes from the Australian people because Australian citizens vote for people to represent them in parliament.
The representatives in parliament must answer to the people, through elections, for the decisions they make.

The Rule of Law
All Australians are equal under the law. The Rule of Law means that no person, group or religious rule is above the
law. Everyone, including people who hold positions of power in the Australian community, must obey Australia’s
laws. This includes government, community and religious leaders, as well as business people and the police.

Living peacefully
Australians are proud to live in a peaceful country with a stable system of government. Australians believe that
change should occur through discussion, peaceful persuasion, and the democratic process. We reject violence
as a way to change a person’s mind or the law.

Respect for all individuals regardless of background
Australia’s democratic system is based on the principle that every individual, regardless of their background,
has rights and equality under Australian law. All Australians are expected to treat each other with dignity and
respect, regardless of their race, country of origin, gender, sexual orientation, marital status, age, disability,
heritage, culture, politics, wealth or religion.

Our freedoms
Freedom of speech
and freedom of expression
Freedom of speech is a core Australian value and
underpins our democratic system. Freedom of
speech means people can say and write what
they think, and discuss their ideas with others.
For example, people can criticise the government,
protest peacefully against government decisions
and campaign to change laws, so long as at all
times they are still obeying Australian laws.
Freedom of expression means people can express
their views, including through art, film, music and
literature. People are free to meet in public or private
places for social or political discussion.
At all times, even while engaging in freedom of speech
and freedom of expression, the laws of Australia must
be obeyed. We must also respect other people’s
freedom of speech and freedom of expression.

Freedom of association
Freedom of association is the right to form and join
associations to pursue common goals. For example,
in Australia people are free to join any legal
organisation, such as a political party, trade union,
religious, cultural or social group. People can also
decide not to join, and cannot be forced into doing so.

Australians can gather with others to protest against
a government action or an organisation. At all times,
however, the laws of Australia must be obeyed.
This means that such gatherings must be peaceful,
and must not injure any person or damage property.

Freedom of religion
Australia has a Judaeo-Christian heritage, and many
Australians describe themselves as Christians, but
there are people in Australia from all the large religions.
Australia has public holidays on Christian days such
as Good Friday, Easter Sunday and Christmas Day.
The government and the law treat all citizens equally,
whatever their religion or beliefs. The government in
Australia is secular, which means it operates
separately from churches or other religious entities.
Australia has no official national religion. People in
Australia are free to follow any religion they choose.
They may also not choose to follow a religion.
At all times, even while engaging in religious
practices, the laws of Australia must be obeyed.
Where there is a conflict between an Australian law
and a religious practice, Australian law prevails.

Our equalities
There are a number of laws in Australia that ensure a person is not treated differently to others because of their
gender, race, disability or age.

Gender equality
Men and women have equal rights in Australia. It is against the law to discriminate against a person because of
their gender.

Equality of opportunity and a ‘fair go’
Australians value equal opportunity in our society; what is often called a ‘fair go’. This means that what
someone achieves in life should be as a result of their talents, work and effort, rather than their wealth or
background. This is to ensure that there are no formal class distinctions in Australian society.

Responsibilities and privileges of
Australian citizenship
When you become an Australian citizen, you will have additional responsibilities and privileges.

Responsibilities—what you will give Australia
As an Australian citizen you must:
• obey the laws of Australia
• vote in federal and state or territory elections, and in a referendum
• defend Australia should the need arise
• serve on a jury if called to do so.

Privileges—what Australia will give you
As an Australian citizen you can:
• vote in federal and state or territory elections, and in a referendum
• apply for children born overseas to become Australian citizens by descent
• apply for a job in the Australian Public Service or in the Australian Defence Force
• seek election to parliament
• apply for an Australian passport and re-enter Australia freely
• ask for consular assistance from an Australian official while overseas.

Responsibilities
Obey the laws of Australia

Defend Australia should the need arise

Our representatives in government make laws to
maintain an orderly, free and safe society and to
protect our rights. All Australian citizens and other
people in Australia must obey the laws of Australia.

While service in the Australian Defence Force is
voluntary, a responsibility for Australian citizens is
to defend Australia should the need arise. It is vital
that all Australian citizens be committed to joining
together to defend the nation and its way of life
if necessary.

More information about some important laws in
Australia can be found in Part 3, Government and the
law in Australia.

Voting in federal and state or territory
elections, and in a referendum
Voting is an important responsibility, right and privilege
for all Australian citizens aged 18 years or over.
It is a responsibility for Australian citizens aged
18 years or over to vote in federal and state or territory
elections, and in a referendum, which is a vote to
change the Australian Constitution. By doing this,
Australian citizens have a say in how Australia is
governed and contribute to its future.

Serve on a jury if called to do so
Jury service, if requested, is a responsibility for
Australian citizens aged 18 years or over. A jury is a
group of ordinary Australian men and women who
listen to the evidence in a court case and decide if a
person is guilty or not guilty.
Australian citizens who are on the electoral roll can
be called to serve on a jury. Jury service helps to
ensure that the court system is open and fair.

Voting is compulsory in federal and state or territory
elections. It may not be compulsory to vote in local
government elections in some states.
More information about the Australian Constitution can
be found in Part 3, Government and the law in Australia.

Privileges
Apply for work in the Australian Public Service and the Australian Defence Force
A privilege of Australian citizenship is to apply for a job in the Australian Public Service and work for the
Australian Government, for example, in Services Australia or the Australian Taxation Office (ATO).
Australian citizens also have the right to apply for a job in the Australian Defence Force (the Army, Navy and
Air Force).

Seek election to parliament
Australian citizens who are aged 18 years or over, and who are not dual citizens, can seek election to parliament at
the federal, state or territory level. It is an honour and a serious responsibility to serve in an Australian parliament.

Apply for an Australian passport and re-enter Australia freely
When you become an Australian citizen, you have the right to live freely in Australia. You also have the privilege to
apply for an Australian passport. If you travel overseas as an Australian citizen, you are free to return to Australia
without the need for a visa.

Ask for consular assistance from an Australian official while overseas
In many countries, Australia has an embassy, high commission or consulate. While you are overseas, you can ask
for help from an Australian government official in times of need. This includes in the case of emergencies such as
civil unrest and natural disasters.
Australian officials can also help Australian citizens overseas with the issue of an emergency passport, and advice
and support in the case of an accident, serious illness or death.
When in another country, you must obey the laws of that country.

Apply for children born overseas to become Australian citizens by descent
Australian citizens can apply for their child born overseas to become an Australian citizen by descent.

Participating in Australian society
Australia encourages all citizens to actively participate in society. Active citizens take on the responsibility and
privilege of shaping Australia’s future. For example, you can join neighbourhood and local community
organisations, volunteer to do social and community work, join an arts or cultural organisation, and actively
participate in political life.
Paying tax is another important way you directly contribute to the Australian community and is required by law.
Tax is paid out of the money you earn, whether it is from a job, a business or investments, and is collected by the
ATO. There are also taxes on many goods and services. The ATO works to ensure all citizens are aware of their tax
rights and obligations to pay the correct amount of tax.
Many of the benefits that Australians enjoy are made possible through taxes. Taxes are spent on services including
government-funded healthcare and education, defence, roads and railways, and social security.
By working and paying taxes, you support the government to provide these important services to the Australian
community. State and territory governments and local councils also collect taxes to pay for services. These
services help make Australia the peaceful and prosperous country it is today.

PART THREE
Government and the law in Australia
At the citizenship ceremony, you pledge to uphold and obey the laws of Australia. Australia’s system of government
is a parliamentary democracy. It is important for you to understand this system of government, how laws are made
in our parliamentary democracy and how they are administered. It is also important to understand how you, as a
citizen, will have a say in running the country.

How do I have my say?
Voting
As outlined in Part 2, in Australia, citizens aged 18 years or over must enrol to vote in federal, state and territory
elections and referenda on constitutional change.
In Australia’s parliamentary democracy, citizens have a say on how Australia is governed by voting for a person to
represent them in parliament. If you are not correctly enrolled, you are not able to vote in an election.
Voting is compulsory in Australian elections, or if there are referenda on constitutional change.
The Australian Electoral Commission (AEC) is a Commonwealth agency responsible for conducting federal
elections and referendums, and maintaining the Commonwealth electoral roll. The AEC is independent of the
government. Political parties or people in government cannot influence the decisions of the AEC.
In Australia, voting in an election is by secret ballot, so you are free and safe to vote for any candidate. No one is
allowed to know whom you have voted for, unless you choose to tell them. If you do not vote in an election and do
not have a good reason for not voting, you may have to pay a fine. Compulsory voting is a way to make sure that the
people have a say in who will govern and represent them in parliament.

Raising matters with your representatives
Australian citizens can contact their elected representative to raise their concerns about government policy.
In this way, all Australians can have a say in forming the laws and policies of a government. If a citizen tells his
or her elected representative a law needs to be changed, the elected representative should consider what has
been suggested.

How did we establish our system of government?
Federation
After British settlement and before 1901, Australia was made up of six separate, self-governing British colonies.
Each colony had its own constitution and laws relating to defence, immigration, postage, trade and transport.
However, this created difficulties between the colonies. For example, trade and transport between the colonies
was expensive and slow, and enforcing the law across borders was difficult. The separate colonies also had weak
systems of defence.
As a result, people wanted to unite the colonies to form a single nation. More importantly, Australia’s national
identity was beginning to form. Sporting teams were representing Australia internationally and an Australian
culture was developing in popular songs, poems, stories and art.
Uniting the nation was a difficult task, but over time, the idea of one Australian nation became a reality.
On 1 January 1901, the colonies were united into a federation of states called the Commonwealth of Australia.

The Australian Constitution
The Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act 1900
(Australian Constitution) is the legal document that sets
out the basic rules for the government of Australia.
The Australian Constitution was originally passed
as part of a British Act of Parliament in 1900.
On 1 January 1901, the Australian Constitution came
into effect and the Australian colonies became one
independent nation: the Commonwealth of Australia.
The Australian Constitution established the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia,
consisting of a House of Representatives and
a Senate. The Constitution also established
the High Court of Australia, which has the ultimate
power to apply and interpret the laws
of Australia.
The Australian people can change the Australian
Constitution by voting in a referendum, such as the
1967 Referendum where more than 90 per cent of
Australians voted ‘Yes’ to allow Aboriginal peoples to
be counted in the Census.
In a referendum, there needs to be a ‘double
majority’ for the Australian Constitution to be
changed. That is, both the majority of voters in a
majority of states and a majority of voters across
the nation must vote for the change.

The Australian Constitution

How is the power of government controlled?
The Australian Constitution divides the power of government between the legislative (Parliament), executive
(for example the Prime Minister and the Cabinet) and judicial powers (judges), to stop one person, or one group,
from holding all the power.

Legislative power
Legislative power is the power to make laws. Parliament has the power to make and change the laws in Australia.
Parliament is made up of representatives who are elected by the people of Australia.

Executive power
Executive power is the power to put the laws into practice. The Executive includes the Prime Minister, Australian
government ministers and the Governor-General. Ministers are responsible for government departments.

Judicial power
Judges have the power to interpret and apply the law. Courts and judges are independent of parliament
and government.
These powers are written into the Australian Constitution.

Who is Australia’s Head of State?
Australia’s Head of State is the King of Australia,
His Majesty King Charles III.
The King of Australia appoints the Governor-General as
his representative in Australia, on advice from the
Australian Prime Minister. The Governor-General acts
independently of all political parties. The King does not
have a day-to-day role in government.
In each of the states there is a governor who
represents the King in a role that is similar to
the Governor-General.

Constitutional monarchy
Australia is a constitutional monarchy, which means
that the King is Australia’s Head of State, but has to act
in accordance with the Constitution. As the King does
not live in Australia, his powers are delegated to the
Governor-General in Australia.
The Australian system of parliamentary democracy
reflects British and North American traditions combined
in a way that is uniquely Australian. In the Australian
system, the leader of the Australian Government is the
Prime Minister.

His Majesty King Charles III

The role of the Governor-General
The Governor-General is not part of the government and must remain neutral.
The Governor-General’s role includes:
• signing all Bills passed by the Australian Parliament into law (this is called Royal Assent)
• performing ceremonial duties
• approving the appointment of the Australian Government and its ministers, federal judges and other officials
• starting the process for a federal election
• acting as Commander-in-Chief of the Australian Defence Force.
The Governor-General also has special powers known as ‘reserve powers’ that can only be used in specific
circumstances.

Who are some of Australia’s leaders?
Head of State

Government minister

The King of Australia

A Member of Parliament chosen by a government
leader to be responsible for an area of government

Governor-General
The representative of the Head of State in Australia

Member of Parliament (MP)

Governor

An elected representative of the people in the
Australian Parliament or a state parliament

The representative of the Head of State
in each Australian state

Senator

Prime Minister

An elected representative of a state or territory in
the Australian Parliament

The leader of the Australian Government

Premier
The leader of a state government

Chief Minister

Mayor or Shire President
The leader of a local government

Councillor
An elected member of a local council

The leader of a territory government

How is Australia governed?
The Australian Government
The Australian Government is also called the Federal Government or the Commonwealth Government.
The Government is made up of members of the Australian Parliament, which has two Houses:
• the House of Representatives
• the Senate.
In a federal election, Australian citizens vote to elect representatives to each House of Parliament.

The House of Representatives
The House of Representatives is one of the Houses in the
Australian Parliament. Other names for the House of
Representatives are the Lower House or the People’s House.
Australia is divided into federal electorates. Members of
Parliament (MPs) represent the people in their electorate.
The number of MPs for each state and territory is based on
the number of people in that state or territory. Overall, there
are over 150 members elected to the House of
Representatives.
Members of Parliament and senators debate proposals
for new laws in the Australian Parliament. The role of the
House of Representatives is to consider, debate, and vote
on proposals for new laws or changes to the laws, and
discuss matters of national importance.

The House of Representatives

The Senate
The Senate is the other House in the Australian Parliament.
The Senate is sometimes called the Upper House,
the House of Review or the States’ House. Voters from each
state also elect senators to represent them in the Senate.
All states are equally represented in the Senate regardless
of their size or population. There is a total of 76 senators.
Each state elects 12 senators, and the Australian Capital
Territory and Northern Territory elect two senators each.
Senators also consider, debate and vote on new laws or
changes to the laws, and discuss matters of national
importance.

The Senate

State and territory government
There are six states and two mainland territories in Australia. Each state government has its own parliament and
constitution. State and territory governments are based in their capital cities. The leader of a state government is the
Premier and the leader of a territory government is the Chief Minister.
State governments operate in a similar way to the Australian Government. In each state, a Governor represents the
King of Australia. In the Northern Territory, an Administrator is appointed by the Governor-General. The role and
responsibilities of the Administrator are similar to those of a state Governor.
States have rights recognised by the Constitution while territories do not. States have the power to pass laws in their
own right while self-governing territory laws can be altered or revoked by the Australian Government at any time.
In state and territory elections, Australian citizens vote to elect a representative for their area. These representatives
become members of the relevant state or territory parliament.

Local government
The states and the Northern Territory are divided into local government areas which may be called cities, shires, towns
or municipalities. Each area has its own local council. Councils are responsible for planning and delivering services to
their local community. Citizens in each local government area vote to elect their local councillors.

What do the three levels of government do?
The main difference between the three levels of government is that, although some responsibilities may overlap,
generally each level of government provides different services.

The Australian Government is responsible for:
taxation
national economic management
immigration and citizenship
employment assistance
postal services and the communications network
social security (pensions and family support)
defence
trade and commerce
airports and air safety
foreign affairs (relations with other countries).

State and territory governments are primarily responsible for:
hospitals and health services
schools
roads and railways
forestry
police and ambulance services
public transport.

Local governments (and the Australian Capital Territory
Government) are responsible for:
street signs, traffic controls
local roads, footpaths, bridges
drains
parks, playgrounds, swimming pools, sports grounds
camping grounds and caravan parks
food and meat inspection
noise and animal control
rubbish collection
local libraries, halls and community centres
certain child-care and aged-care issues
building permits
social planning
local environmental issues.

What role do political parties play in the way
Australia is governed?
A political party is a group of people who share similar ideas about how a country should be governed. They work
together to have the party’s ideas turned into laws. The main political parties in Australia are the Liberal Party of
Australia, the Australian Labor Party, the Nationals and the Australian Greens.
Most parliamentarians belong to political parties. Some do not belong to any political party, and they are called
‘independents’.
In Australia, people are free to join a political party if they choose.

How is the Australian Government formed?
After a federal election, the Australian Government is generally formed by the party or coalition of parties with the
majority of members in the Houses of Representatives. The leader of this party becomes the leader of the
Australian Government: the Prime Minister.
After a federal election, the party or coalition of parties with the second largest number of members in the
House of Representatives forms the Opposition. Its leader is called the Leader of the Opposition.
The Prime Minister recommends members of the House of Representatives or Senators to become ministers in
the Australian Government. The Governor-General approves the appointment of the Prime Minister and ministers.
Government ministers are responsible for an area of government (called a portfolio), such as employment,
Indigenous Affairs or the Treasury. Ministers with the most important portfolios make up the Cabinet, which is the
key decision making body of government.

How are laws made?
The Australian Parliament has the power to make or change laws in Australia to benefit the nation.
If a member of the Australian Parliament proposes to introduce a new law or
change an existing one, this proposal is called a ‘Bill’.

The House of Representatives and the Senate consider,
debate and vote on whether they agree with the Bill.

If the majority of members in each House of Parliament agree to the Bill,
it goes to the Governor-General.

The Governor-General signs a Bill so that it becomes law.
This is called ‘Royal Assent’.
State and territory parliaments make their own laws in a similar way.

How are laws enforced?
The courts

The police

The courts in Australia are independent. A court will
decide if a person has or has not broken the law and
decide the penalty. Courts can only base their
decision on the evidence before them.

The police maintain peace and order in the
community. It is their job to protect life and property.
They are independent of the government. If the police
believe that someone has broken the law, they can
arrest them and bring them before a court of law.
The police may give evidence in court, but the court
decides if a person is guilty or not.

Judges and magistrates
The judge or magistrate is the highest authority in a
court. They are independent and no one can tell
them what to decide.
Judges and magistrates are appointed by the
government, but the government cannot take their
jobs away if it disagrees with their decisions.

Juries
In Australia’s court system, people are considered
innocent until they are found guilty in a court.
Every person has the right to be represented by
a lawyer in court.
A court will use a jury in some cases to decide if a
person has broken the law. The role of a jury is to
decide in court if a person is innocent or guilty. A jury
is a group of ordinary Australian citizens randomly
chosen from the general population. The judge
explains the law to the jury. In a criminal trial, if the jury
finds a person guilty, the judge decides the penalty.

The states and the Northern Territory have their own
police forces. They deal with crimes under state and
territory laws.
Australia also has a national police force called the
Australian Federal Police (AFP). The AFP investigates
crimes against federal laws, for example, drug
trafficking, crimes against national security and
crimes against the environment. The AFP is also
responsible for general police work in the Australian
Capital Territory.
The police and the community have a good
relationship in Australia. You can report crimes and
seek assistance from your local police.
In Australia, it is a serious crime to bribe the police.
It is a crime to even offer a bribe to a police officer.

Criminal offences in Australia
It is important for you to be familiar with the laws in Australia. If you break an Australian law that you did not know
about, you could be charged, as not knowing the law is no excuse.
Some of the most serious crimes include murder, assault, sexual assault, violence against people or property,
armed robbery or theft, having sexual relations with children or young people who are aged below the legal age of
consent, dangerous driving of a motor car, possession of illegal drugs, and fraud.
Everyone has the right to experience positive and safe relationships with their families, friends and loved ones.
As in other countries, violence towards another person is illegal in Australia and is a very serious crime.
This includes violence within the home and within marriage, known as domestic or family violence. Domestic and
family violence includes behaviour or threats that aim to control a partner by causing fear or threatening their
safety. Domestic and family violence can include hitting, isolating a family member from friends and family, or
threatening children or pets. Domestic and family violence is not accepted and is against the law.
A person who commits these crimes can go to jail, whether they are a man or a woman. No one should accept
being treated badly or harmed.

Traffic offences
Road and traffic rules are controlled by state and territory governments. People can be fined or sent to prison for
breaking traffic laws. To drive a car in Australia, you must have a local driver’s licence and the car must be registered.
Everybody travelling in a car must wear a seatbelt. Babies and young children must be in an approved car seat.
Traffic laws are very strict. It is illegal to drive after taking drugs or if you are above the blood alcohol limit. It is also
against the law to use a hand-held mobile device while driving.

PART FOUR
Australian values

Australian values based on freedom, respect,
fairness and equality of opportunity are central to our
community remaining a secure, prosperous and
peaceful place to live.
Our values define and shape our country and they
are a reason why so many people want to become
Australian citizens.
Australian citizenship is about living out these values
in your everyday life and in your local community. It is
therefore very important that you understand the
values that all Australian people are expected to
respect, share and uphold.

Our values
Commitment to the Rule of Law
All Australians are protected by our laws and legal
systems. Australians recognise the importance of laws
in maintaining a peaceful and orderly society.
Under the Rule of Law, all Australians are equal in
relation to the law and no person or group is above the
law. In Australia, everybody should obey the law and not
break it at any time, otherwise you will face penalties.
You should follow the law even if no one is watching.

Australian laws apply to all people in Australia.
This means regardless of your background or culture,
you must follow Australian laws.

Parliamentary democracy
Australia’s system of government is a parliamentary
democracy. Our laws are determined by parliaments
elected by the people. This means that Australian
citizens are involved in how the country is governed.
The power of the government comes from the
Australian people because Australian citizens vote
for people to represent them in parliament.
Voting is compulsory in Australia. This shows the
importance of participating in elections.

Freedom of speech
People in Australia should be able to express their ideas freely, so long as it is within the law. In Australia, people are
free to meet in public or private places for social or political discussion. People are also free to say and write what
they think about any topic and to discuss their ideas with others. Newspapers, television and radio outlets have the
same freedom.
Australians are allowed to peacefully protest against the actions of the government, because tolerance of peaceful
public protest is an essential part of democracy.
It is never acceptable to promote violence against another person or group of people (such as because of their
culture, ethnicity, religion or background) because it is against Australian values and law. It is also illegal to make
false allegations or encourage others to break the law. Other people’s freedom of speech and freedom of
expression must be respected, as long as such expression is lawful.

Freedom of association
In Australia, people are free to join or leave any group voluntarily as long as it is within the law. People are free to join
any legal organisation, such as a political party, trade union, religious, cultural or social group. Individuals cannot
be compelled to join an organisation or forced to leave it.
Australians can gather freely with others, including to protest against a government action or an organisation.
However, all protests must be within the law. This means they must be peaceful, and must not injure any person or
damage property.

Freedom of religion
Australia has no official national religion and people in Australia are free to follow any religion they choose.
The government treats all citizens equally, whatever their religion or beliefs. However, religious practices must not
break Australian laws.
Religious laws have no legal status in Australia. Australian law must be followed by everyone in Australia, including
where it is different from religious laws. Some religious or cultural practices, such as polygamy (being married to
more than one person at the same time) and forced marriage, are against the law in Australia and can result in
severe legal penalties, including imprisonment.
Religious intolerance is not acceptable in Australian society. All people should be provided equal opportunity to
pursue their goals and interests regardless of their ethnicity or religion as long as they are obeying Australian law.

Equality of all people under the law
Australian society values the equal rights of all
people, regardless of gender, sexual orientation, age,
disability, religion, race, or national or ethnic origin.
There are a number of laws in Australia that protect a
person from being treated differently from others.
The law is applied in Australia so that people from
different backgrounds are not given preferential
treatment, nor discriminated against. For example,
Buddhists and people of all other faiths receive the
same treatment as Christians. Under our laws, two
people can marry each other, including marriage
between two men or two women.
Men and women have equal rights in Australia and
should be provided equality of opportunity to pursue
their goals and interests. Both men and women have
equal access to education and employment, can
vote at elections, stand for parliament, join the
Australian Defence Force and the police force, and
are treated equally in courts of law.
It is against the law to discriminate against a person
because of their gender. In Australia, it is a right for a
woman to get a job ahead of a man, if she has better
qualifications and skills.

Both men and women have the right to make their
own independent choices about personal matters,
such as marriage and religion, and are protected by
the law from intimidation or violence. Physical
violence against a spouse or partner is never
acceptable and it is a criminal offence in Australia.
Divorce is acceptable in Australia. Either a husband or
a wife may apply for a divorce to the courts, even if the
other spouse wishes to continue the marriage.

Equality of opportunity and a ‘fair go’
We believe that everyone deserves a ‘fair go’
and people should not be limited by any kind of
class distinction. Everyone, regardless of their
background, is given an equal opportunity to achieve
success in life, and ensuring that everyone has the
same legal rights is an important aspect of fairness
in Australian society.
What someone achieves in life should be a result of
their hard work and talents. This means a person
should get a job based on their skills and experience,
not because of their gender, wealth or ethnicity.
When an organisation needs to fill a job, the law
supports that they select the person with the best
skills and experience for the job.
Many new migrants in Australia have become leaders
in business, their profession, the arts, public service
and sport through their hard work and enterprise.

Mutual respect and tolerance
for others
In Australia, individuals must respect the freedom
and dignity of others, and their opinions and choices.
It is against the law to be violent towards another
person. Violence of any kind, including verbal and
physical abuse, is illegal. Australians believe in
peaceful disagreement and above all the right to be
safe and free from violence and intimidation.
In Australia, there are very strict laws concerning the
age of sexual consent, which is 16 or 17 depending
on which state or territory you reside in. For example,
in Australia, a 20 year old man cannot have sexual
relations with a 15 year old girl, because that is
against the law in all Australian states and territories.

In Australia, the lawful actions of the police should be
supported. You should obey a lawful request from
the police, because all Australians commit to
following the law.
Australia values the principles of mutual respect
and tolerance. This means listening to others and
respecting their views and opinions, even when
they are different from your own. People should
be tolerant of each other where they find that
they disagree.
Racism has no place in Australia. This includes
creating or sharing racially offensive material on
the internet or other publications and making
racially abusive comments in a public place or at
a sporting event.

Our community
Making a contribution
Citizenship gives you the opportunity to fully participate in our nation’s life and community. It means that you are
ready to fulfil your responsibilities as an Australian citizen. Australians expect everyone living in Australia to
participate in our society and make a contribution to our community. Everyone has a responsibility to try and
support themselves and their families when they are able to do so.

Compassion for those in need
Australians value ‘mateship’. We help each other in times of need. For example, this might mean taking a meal to
an elderly neighbour, driving a friend to a medical appointment, or visiting someone who is sick, frail or lonely.
In this spirit of mateship, Australia has a strong tradition of community service and volunteering – to look out for
each other and strengthen the community. Volunteering is a great opportunity to share knowledge, learn new
skills, and increase your integration into and sense of belonging to the Australian community. There are many
opportunities for you to volunteer in Australia.

English as the national language
Australian society values the English language as the national language of Australia, and as an important unifying
element of society. People living in Australia should make an effort to learn English.
It is important to learn to speak English because it helps to get an education, a job, and better integrate into the
community. It is essential for economic participation and social cohesion. Applicants for Australian citizenship
must undertake to make reasonable efforts to learn the English language, if it is not their native language.

Helping to keep our society safe
In Australia, we each have responsibilities to help protect Australian society. For example, if people in Australia
suspect their friend or neighbour may be planning to commit a serious crime, they should report this to Australian
government authorities as soon as possible. In this way, we can help to protect the safety of our community.
Similarly, if a person in Australia sees or has knowledge of a child being abused, they should report this to the
police to investigate.
Online abuse is not accepted in Australia. This is sometimes called cyber abuse. Examples include sharing sexual
photos or videos online without consent, stalking a person online, or making racially abusive comments about a
person online. Many forms of cyber abuse are illegal in Australia.

Loyalty to Australia
In the citizenship pledge, Australian citizens pledge their loyalty to Australia and its people. Australian citizens may
also hold the citizenship of another country or countries if the laws of those countries allow. This is known as dual,
or multiple, citizenship. However, even if a person is also a citizen of another country, an Australian citizen within
Australia must follow all Australian laws at all times. Some Australian laws must also be followed by Australian
citizens even when they are overseas. For example, it’s illegal for Australians to be involved in any sexual activity,
here or overseas, with a child under 16 years of age.
Australian society is based on our shared obligations not to undermine Australia’s interests and security.
For example, using social media to share official government secrets would be undermining Australia’s interests.
Similarly, promoting distrust in and fear of an ethnic community would damage Australian community relations.

In Australia, we come together in times of crisis
and take care of each other in good times and
bad. During Australia’s devastating bushfire
season of 2019-20, which resulted in the loss of life,
property and wildlife, and environmental
destruction, many multicultural communities
worked to collect money, clothes and food
donations to help people affected by the bushfires.
For example, members of the Chinese,
Vietnamese and Cambodian communities in
Victoria collected donations at shopping centres
and fundraised through local community group
events, and members of the Sikh community
donated thousands of bottles of water to
communities and firefighters in Queensland.

In conclusion
Our democratic institutions and shared Australian values have created our peaceful and stable society.
We have a rich and unique culture to share. As an Australian citizen, you will become part of our nation’s story and
will contribute to our future. Australia welcomes you. Citizenship is our common bond.