Glossary of testable section
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples
the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples are the original inhabitants of the land in Australia
The Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples of Australia make up approximately three per cent of the
Australian population.
Australian Human Rights Commission
an independent Commission which investigates complaints about discrimination and human rights breaches
Incidents of racism can be reported to the Australian Human Rights Commission.
Australian Public Service
government departments and people employed by them
Paul got a job in the Australian Public Service as an employee of Services Australia.
civil unrest
demonstrations and riots by large numbers of people, usually protesting against a government decision or policy
There was civil unrest when the government passed the unpopular laws.
coalition
the joining of two or more political parties, usually to form a government or opposition
After the election, there was no party with a majority in the House of Representatives, so two parties with
similar ideas joined to form a coalition.
commission
a group of people with an official responsibility
An independent commission organises the elections.
Constitution
the supreme law of Australia by which the government must abide
The Constitution sets out the legislative, executive, and judicial powers.
constitutional monarchy
a country in which a king or queen is the head of state, whose powers are limited by the Constitution
Our Constitution established the Commonwealth of Australia as a constitutional monarchy, with the King or
Queen of the United Kingdom as our Head of State.
court
a place where legal cases are heard by a judge or magistrate
When people break the law, they may go to court.
criminal trial
a hearing of facts by a court to decide if a person is guilty or not guilty of a crime
After the criminal trial, the bank robber was sent to jail.
cyber abuse
behaviour that uses technology to threaten, intimidate, harass or humiliate someone with the intent to hurt them
Many types of cyber abuse are against the law in Australia and should be reported to the police and the online
service, such as social media platform, that it occurred on.
democracy
government by the people through elected representatives
Grace was happy to live in a democracy where she could vote for her representative in parliament.
domestic and family violence
Behaviour or threats that aim to control a partner by causing fear or threatening their safety. Domestic and family
violence is not accepted and is against the law.
Domestic and family violence is against the law in Australia and should be reported to the police.
drug trafficking
carrying or buying drugs to sell illegally
Jess was sent to jail for drug trafficking.
election
a process through which citizens choose people to represent them in Parliament
Australian citizens aged 18 years or over must vote in an election.
electoral roll
the list of people registered to vote in an election or referendum
When Jan arrived at the voting centre, the official looked for her name on the electoral roll.
electorate
districts made up of voters who vote to elect politicians in the House of Representatives
Electorates are called electoral districts, divisions, or seats.
enforce the law
to make sure that people follow the law
Police enforce the law and keep the peace.
equality
the same in status
Australians believe in the equality of all people.
executive power
the power and authority to administer the laws, one of the three powers under the Australian Constitution
Australian Government ministers and the Governor-General have executive power to administer the laws
made by the Australian Parliament.
fair go
everyone, regardless of their background, is given an equal opportunity to achieve success in life
In Australia, we believe everyone deserves a ‘fair go’.
federation
the union of colonies into one nation with the colonies retaining certain powers
In 1901, the colonies were united into a federation called the Commonwealth of Australia.
First Fleet
the group of 11 ships that set out from Britain under Captain Arthur Phillip to establish a convict settlement in
New South Wales
The First Fleet landed at Sydney Cove on 26 January 1788.
floral emblem
national flower
Australia’s floral emblem is the golden wattle.
forced marriage
a marriage where one or both of the couple did not have a free choice
She was never happy about her forced marriage and always wanted to leave it.
from this time forward
from now and in the future
At the citizenship ceremony, you promise to be loyal to Australia from this time forward.
icon
a well-known image
The Opera House is a famous Sydney icon.
Indigenous
The Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander peoples of Australia
Indigenous Australians are the First Peoples of this country.
integration
the process of adaptation by migrants so that they can participate in and contribute to their new, evolving society
Over time, migrants benefit from their integration into Australia and the local community.
judicial power
the power and authority to interpret and apply the laws, one of the three powers under the Australian Constitution
The courts in Australia have judicial power.
legislative power
the power and authority to make and change the laws, one of the three powers under the Australian Constitution
Under the Constitution, Parliament has legislative power.
liberties (liberty)
personal freedom and independence
In our democratic society, people have freedom of speech, freedom of expression, freedom of religion and
freedom of association. We value these liberties.
magistrate
a judge of a lower court
The magistrate found the thief guilty and sent him to jail.
mateship
helping and receiving help from others, especially in difficult times
When my car broke down, the other drivers helped to push it in the spirit of mateship.
national anthem
national song
Australia’s national anthem is ‘Advance Australia Fair’.
parliamentary democracy
a system of government based on the regular election of representatives to parliament by the citizens
In a parliamentary democracy, the people vote for their representatives.
political party
a group of people who share similar ideas about how a country should be governed and usually seek to be elected
Members of a political party meet regularly, for example, to discuss improvements to public transport.
racism
prejudice, discrimination, harassment or hatred directed at someone because of their race, colour, national or
ethnic origin
Racism is against the law in Australia and should be reported to the police. Complaints can also be made to
the Australian Human Rights Commission.
referendum
a vote by all voters on a proposed change to the Australian Constitution
In a 1967 referendum, the people voted to count Aboriginal peoples in the census.
representative
a person who acts or speaks for others
My local council representative liked my idea and presented it at the council meeting.
respect
show consideration for someone as a person, or a decision they have made
Emily was glad her family were able to respect her decision to become a Buddhist.
Rule of Law
all people, including citizens and the government, are bound by the law
Everyone in Australia, including the Prime Minister, are bound by all Australian laws under the Rule of Law.
Services Australia
an Australian Government agency that delivers a range of health, social and welfare payments and services
through Medicare, Centrelink, and Child Support
Services Australia delivers support payments through Centrelink and other services.
secret ballot
a system of voting where people vote privately, so no one can influence or pressure them to vote in a certain way
In a secret ballot, no one watches while you write your vote.
secular
separate from religion
In a secular society, there is no official religion.
self-sufficient
able to provide for your own needs, without the help of other people
Having a job meant that he was able to buy his own food and pay his own rent. He was self-sufficient.
set up
to build, establish, start
Governor Phillip set up the first colony in New South Wales.
shire
a local government area
The roads in my shire are very safe.
social security
government pensions or benefits to help unemployed people, disabled people, elderly people and others in need
When Trang lost her job, she applied for social security benefits.
The Australian Taxation Office (ATO)
an Australian Government agency that manages the tax and superannuation systems that support and fund
services for Australians
Every year most Australians submit a tax return to the Australian Taxation Office.
values
the principles that help a person decide what is right and wrong, and how to act in various situations
Australia has a shared set of values, which we call Australian values.
volunteer
a person who gives their time to a person or organisation without expecting payment
Raza is a volunteer who teaches people English in their homes.